[docs] overview of cryptographic primitives in Move (#9400)
aptos-labs/aptos-core: developer-docs-site/docs/move/move-on-aptos/cryptography.md

---
title: "Cryptography"
slug: "cryptography"
---

# Cryptography in Move

> The Move language originally supported only four basic cryptographic operations:

Reviewer: maybe start with a high level of the cryptographic functions we introduce into move followed by the principles

Author: Fixed.

1. Hashing with SHA2-256 via [`std::hash::sha2_256`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/137acee4c6dddb1c86398dce25b041d78a3028d3/aptos-move/framework/move-stdlib/sources/hash.move#L6)
2. Hashing with SHA3-256 via [`std::hash::sha3_256`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/137acee4c6dddb1c86398dce25b041d78a3028d3/aptos-move/framework/move-stdlib/sources/hash.move#L7)
3. Verifying an Ed25519 signature via (the now obsolete) [`signature::ed25519_verify`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/3b53225b5a1effcce5dee9597a129216510dc424/aptos-move/framework/aptos-framework/sources/Signature.move#L19)
4. Validating an Ed25519 public key via (the now obsolete) [`signature::ed25519_validate_pubkey`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/3b53225b5a1effcce5dee9597a129216510dc424/aptos-move/framework/aptos-framework/sources/Signature.move#L9)

Since then, we have heavily extended support for cryptography in Move. 

> Behind these new cryptographic features were two **key guiding principles**:

Reviewer: This feels superfluous. Though I am proud of the work made to get us to where we are today.

Reviewer: Maybe just say...

The Aptos adapter for Move has introduced many useful cryptographic primitives. The key guiding principles behind this are

(I don't think we need bold / emphasis)

2. When native functions are not available, **empower developers** to implement their own cryptographic primitives on top of abstract cryptographic building blocks such as _finite fields_ and _Abelian groups_ (e.g., via the [`aptos_std::crypto_algebra`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/crypto_algebra.move) module).

An overview of these features and (some of) the applications they enable follows below. 
For a detailed view, see the [cryptography Move modules code](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography).

## Cryptographic hash functions in Move

Developers can now use more cryptographic hash functions in Move via the [`aptos_std::aptos_hash`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/hash.move) module:

 1. Keccak256
 2. SHA2-512
 3. SHA3-512
 4. RIPEMD160

>  5. Blake2b-256

Reviewer: should we make a table here and discuss tradeoff between collision resistance, gas price, storage, etc?

Author: I will put them in a table, since it looks better anyway!

Author: Fixed.

Some of these functions can be used for interoperability with other chains (e.g., verifying Ethereum Merkle proofs via [`aptos_std::aptos_hash::keccak256`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/137acee4c6dddb1c86398dce25b041d78a3028d3/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/hash.move#L35)).
Others, have lower gas costs, such as [`aptos_std::aptos_hash::blake2b_256`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/137acee4c6dddb1c86398dce25b041d78a3028d3/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/hash.move#L69).
In general, a wider variety of hash functions give developers additional freedom in terms of both security and interoperability with other off-chain cryptographic system.

## Digital signature verification in Move

> Developers can now use a *type-safe* API for verifying many types of digital signatures in Move:

Reviewer: typesafety seems to be a core priniciple.

Author: Fixed: added it to key guiding principles.

 1. **Ed25519** signatures in [`aptos_std::ed25519`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ed25519.move)
 2. “Naive” $t$-out-of-$n$ **Ed25519** **multi**-signatures in [`aptos_std::multi_ed25519`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/multi_ed25519.move) (via simple concatentation of Ed25519 signatures)
 3. **ECDSA** signatures over secp256k1 in [`aptos_std::secp256k1`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/secp256k1.move)

>  4. **BLS** signatures, **multi**-signatures, **aggregate** signatures and **threshold** signatures over BLS12-381 in [`aptos_std::bls12831`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/bls12381.move)

Reviewer: maybe we could make a table here on the pros and cons of these different pieces?

I'd love to push users away from using a key algorithm out of convenience and more from whatever education we can provide them.

Author: Hm... that would be a rather nuanced analysis. There's a lot of dimensions to analyze for "pros" and "cons."

I can try to think of some relevant things.

Author: Fixed.

This module has proven useful for implementing several cryptographic primitives:

 1. **Zero-knowledge $\Sigma$-protocols**, as demonstrated in the [`veiled_coin` example](#veiled-coins).
 2. **ElGamal** encryption; see [`aptos_std::ristretto255_elgamal`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ristretto255_elgamal.move)
 3. **Pedersen** commitments; see [`aptos_std::ristretto255_pedersen`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ristretto255_pedersen.move)
 4. **Bulletproofs** ZK range proofs[^bulletproofs]; see [`aptos_std::ristretto255_bulletproofs`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ristretto255_bulletproofs.move)

Need ideas for a cryptosystem to build on top of `ristretto255`?
A popular primitive that you could easily build would be the [schnorrkel](https://github.com/w3f/schnorrkel) signature scheme, which is a hardended version of Schnorr signatures over Ristretto255 groups.

### Generic elliptic curve arithmetic in Move

What is better than one curve? More curves!

> The [`aptos_std::crypto_algebra`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/crypto_algebra.move) provides elliptic curve arithmetic operations for **any** supported elliptic curve, including pairing-friendly curves.

Author: Suggestion please?

> The [`aptos_std::crypto_algebra`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/crypto_algebra.move) provides elliptic curve arithmetic operations for **any** supported elliptic curve, including pairing-friendly curves.

Reviewer 2: "**any** curve that is or will be supported in the future" in the next line (97)

```move
use aptos_std::bls12381_algebra::{
    G1, G2, Gt, FormatG1Compr, FormatG2Compr, HashG1XmdSha256SswuRo
};

// Aborts with code 1 if the BLS signature over the BLS12-381 curve fails to verify. 
assert(
    bls_verify_sig<G1, G2, Gt, FormatG1Compr, FormatG2Compr, HashG1XmdSha256SswuRo>(
        dst, signature, message, public_key
    ),
    1
);
```

For more use cases of the `crypto_algebra` module, check out some Move examples:

1. [Verifying Groth16 zkSNARK proofs](#groth16-zksnark-verifier) over **any** curve 
2. [Verifying randomness from the `drand` beacon](#verifying-randomness-from-the-drand-beacon)

## Building powerful cryptographic applications in Move

### Veiled coins

The [`veiled_coin` example](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/move-examples/veiled_coin/sources) demonstrates how to use [the Ristretto255 modules from above](#ristretto255-arithmetic-in-move) to add a reasonable layer of privacy to coin balances and transactions. 

Specifically, users can **veil** their balance, keeping it hidden from everyone, including validators.

> Furthermore, a user can send a **veiled transaction** that hides only the sent amount from everybody, including validators.

Reviewer 2: Nit, but having "only sent" here makes me think the received amount isn't hidden. I think the next line makes it clear the system isn't anonymous.

Reviewer 2: Sure

An important caveat is that veiled transactions do NOT hide the identities of the sender or the recipient.

> **WARNING:** This module is educational. It is **NOT** production-ready. Using it could likely lead to loss of funds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**WARNING:** This module is educational. It is **NOT** production-ready. Using it could lead to loss of funds.
```

Reviewer: the `likely` is a rather damning comment and makes it read like you may have done something nefarious. As this is our repo and we do at least review code with effort, I'd like to tame it down.

Author: Fixed.

### Groth16 zkSNARK verifier

The [`groth16` example](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/move-examples/groth16_example/sources) demonstrates how to verify Groth16 zkSNARK proofs[^groth16], which are the shortest and fastest-to-verify zero-knowledge proofs for arbitrary computations.
Importantly, as explained [above](#generic-elliptic-curve-arithmetic-in-move), this implementation is *generic* over **any** curve, making it very easy for Move developers to use it with their favorite (supported) curves.

**WARNING:** This code has not been audited. If using it in a production system, proceed at your own risk.

### Verifying randomness from the `drand` beacon

The [`drand` example](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/move-examples/drand/sources) shows how to verify public randomness from the [drand](https://drand.love) randomness beacon.
This randomness can be used in games or any other chance-based smart contract.
We give a simple example of a lottery implemented on top of `drand` randomness in [`lottery.move`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/move-examples/drand/sources/lottery.move).

> **WARNING:** This code has not been audited. If using it in a production system, proceed at your own risk.

Reviewer: I think we should think about this statement, it has been reviewed, what is an audit but a review? I think this should be a bit more explicit in that this has not been audited by a third-party auditing organization or something along those lines.

Author: Fixed.

Another application that can be built on top of `drand` is time-lock encryption[^tlock], which allows users to encrypt information such that it can only be decrypted in a future block.

> We leave this as an exercise to the reader!

Reviewer 2: Would prefer "We don't currently have an implementation but the reader is encouraged to think of one." I think the implication is too unclear otherwise (that we don't have an example to link to)

---
title: "Cryptography"

> slug: "cryptography"

Reviewer: let's avoid slugs

---

# Cryptography in Move

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

Cryptography plays an integral role in ensuring the security, integrity, confidentiality, and immutability of data in blockchain systems. The Aptos adapter for Move provides developers with an array of cryptographic primitives to cater to this need. This document delves into the cryptographic functionalities offered by Move on Aptos and elucidates the principles that drive their design.

```

Reviewer 3: Let's add an intro here

Reviewer: great idea

> The Aptos adapter for Move has introduced many useful cryptographic primitives:
> 
> 1. Cryptographic hash functions (e.g., SHA2-256, SHA3-256, Keccak256, Blake2b-256)
> 2. Digital signature verification (e.g., Ed25519, ECDSA, BLS)
> 3. Elliptic curve arithmetic (e.g., Ristretto255, BLS12-381)
> 4. Groth16 zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) verification
> 5. Bulletproofs zero-knowledge range proof (ZKRP) verification

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Cryptographic Primitives

Move, through the Aptos adapter, encompasses several fundamental cryptographic tools:

1. Cryptographic Hash Functions – These are algorithms designed to produce a fixed-size output (hash) from variable-size input data. Supported functions include SHA2-256, SHA3-256, Keccak256, and Blake2b-256.
2. Digital Signature Verification – This process ensures data integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation. Supported signature schemes include Ed25519, ECDSA, and BLS.
3. Elliptic Curve Arithmetic – Elliptic curves are used as the foundation for various cryptographic operations, such as generating keys, performing digital signatures, and verifying signatures. Supported curves include Ristretto255 and BLS12-381.
4. Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKP) and Zero-Knowledge Range Proofs (ZKRP) – These cryptographic techniques allow a party to prove a statement's truth without revealing the statement itself. Supported methods include Groth16 ZKP verification and Bulletproofs ZKRP verification.
```

Reviewer 3: Created a heading for this section to separate it from the intro.
Added some context to each bullet and combined ZKP and ZKRP into one bullet.

@alinush please modify if you disagree with my descriptions.

Reviewer: nice

The **key guiding principles** behind these cryptographic extensions are:

1. **Minimize gas costs** for Move developers by implementing key primitives as [Move native functions](./move/book/functions#native-functions) (e.g., see the [BLS signatures over BLS12-381 elliptic curves](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/bls12381.move) module)
2. Type-safe APIs (e.g., see the [Ed25519 signature module](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ed25519.move))

> 3. When native functions are not available, **empower developers** to implement their own cryptographic primitives on top of abstract cryptographic building blocks such as _finite fields_ and _Abelian groups_ (e.g., via the [`aptos_std::crypto_algebra`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/crypto_algebra.move) module).

Reviewer: let's order these a bit differently... maybe type safe APIs is actually the biggest one?

> The **key guiding principles** behind these cryptographic extensions are:
> 
> 1. **Minimize gas costs** for Move developers by implementing key primitives as [Move native functions](./move/book/functions#native-functions) (e.g., see the [BLS signatures over BLS12-381 elliptic curves](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/bls12381.move) module)
> 2. Type-safe APIs (e.g., see the [Ed25519 signature module](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ed25519.move))
> 3. When native functions are not available, **empower developers** to implement their own cryptographic primitives on top of abstract cryptographic building blocks such as _finite fields_ and _Abelian groups_ (e.g., via the [`aptos_std::crypto_algebra`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/crypto_algebra.move) module).
> 
> An overview of these features and (some of) the applications they enable follows below. 
> For a detailed view, see the [cryptography Move modules code](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Three fundamental principles guide the design and integration of the Aptos cryptographic extensions into Move:

1. **Economic Gas Usage** – Striving to minimize gas costs for Move developers by implementing key primitives as [Move native functions](./move/book/functions#native-functions). For example, see the module for [BLS signatures over BLS12-381 elliptic curves](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/bls12381.move).
2. **Type-Safe APIs** – Ensuring that APIs are resistant to common mistakes, type-safety enhances code reliability and promotes an efficient development process. For an example, see the [Ed25519 signature module](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ed25519.move))
3. **Empowerment of Developers** – In instances where native functions are unavailable, we empower developers to build their own cryptographic primitives on top of abstract cryptographic building blocks such as `_finite fields_` and `_Abelian groups_`. Refer to the [`aptos_std::crypto_algebra`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/crypto_algebra.move) module for more insights.

Continue reading to delve a bit deeper and uncover some of the intricacies behind these extensions, as well as the range of applications they empower. For the most comprehensive understanding of this subject, refer to the [cryptography Move modules code](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/tree/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography).
```

## Cryptographic hash functions in Move

Developers can now use more cryptographic hash functions in Move via the [`aptos_std::aptos_hash`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/hash.move) module:

| Hash function | Hash size (bits) | Collision-resistance security (bits) |
|---------------|------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Keccak256     | 256              | 128                                  |
| SHA2-512      | 512              | 256                                  |
| SHA3-512      | 512              | 256                                  |
| RIPEMD160     | 160              | 80 (**weak**)                        |

> | Blake2b-256   | 256              | 128                                  |

Reviewer: could we add in some rough gas usage per ... 1KB or something?
and maybe even potential applications?

Author: We will do this later, once @mstraka100 figures out an easy way to benchmark gas costs.

| Signature scheme                                                                                                                                           | Curve         | Sig. size (bytes) | PK size (bytes) | Malleability | Assumptions | Pros          | Cons              |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------|-----------------|--------------|-------------|---------------|-------------------|
| [ECDSA](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/secp256k1.move)                          | secp256k1     | 64                | 64              | Yes          | GGM         | Wide adoption | Security proof    |
| [Ed25519](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/ed25519.move)                          | Edwards 25519 | 64                | 32              | No           | DLA, ROM    | Fast          |                   |

> | [MultiEd25519](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/multi_ed25519.move)               | Edwards 25519 | $4 + t \cdot 64$  | $n \cdot 32$    | No           | DLA, ROM    | Easy-to-adopt | Large sig. size   |

Reviewer: please define all acronyms (DLA, ROM)

| MinPK [BLS](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/bls12381.move)                       | BLS12-381     | 96                | 48              | No           | CDH, ROM    | Versatile     | Slow verification |
| MinSig [BLS](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/7d4fb98c6604c67e526a96f55668e7add7aaebf6/aptos-move/move-examples/drand/sources/drand.move#L57) | BLS12-381     | 48                | 96              | No           | CDH, ROM    | Versatile     | Slow verification |

**Note:** The [`aptos_std::bls12381`](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-stdlib/sources/cryptography/bls12381.move) module for [MinPK BLS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-bls-signature-05#name-variants) signatures is rather **versatile**: it supports verification of individual signatures, **multi**-signatures, **aggregate** signatures and **threshold** signatures.

The digital signature modules above can be used to build smart contract-based wallets, secure claiming mechanisms for airdrops, or any digital-signature-based access-control mechanism for dapps.

> The right choice of a signature scheme in your dapp could depend on many factors:
> 1. **Backwards-compatibility** 
>    - e.g., perhaps the dapp's users only sign using Ed25519
> 2. **Ease-of-implementation**
>    - e.g., while there exist $t$-out-of-$n$ threshold protocols for Ed25519, they are complex to implement on the signer side. As a result, MultiEd25519 could be adopted due to how easily signing can be implemented.
> 3. **Efficiency** 
>    - e.g., some applications are more sensitive to signature size, while others to PK size
>    - e.g., some applications are more sensitive to signing time, while others to signature verification time
> 4. **Security analysis**
>    - e.g., ECDSA's security is proven under strong assumptions such as the Generic Group Model (GGM)
>    - e.g., some signature schemes have malleability issues: a valid signature $\sigma$ can be mauled into a _different_ yet-still-valid signature $\sigma'$ on the same message $m$
> 5. **Versatility**
>    - e.g., $t$-out-of-$n$ threshold BLS is very simple to implement 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The right choice of a signature scheme in your dapp could depend on many factors:
1. **Backwards-compatibility** 
   - If your dapp's user base predominantly uses a particular signing mechanism, it would be prudent to support that mechanism for ease of transition and adoption.
     - Example: If users mainly sign using Ed25519, it becomes a logical choice.
2. **Ease-of-implementation**
   - While theoretically sound, complex protocols may be challenging to implement in practice.
     - Example: Even though $t$-out-of-$n$ threshold protocols for Ed25519 exist, their intricacy on the signer's side might push developers toward MultiEd25519 due to its more straightforward signing implementation.
3. **Efficiency** 
   - Depending on the dapp's requirements, you might prioritize one aspect of efficiency over another.
     - Signature Size vs. Public Key (PK) Size: Some applications might prioritize a smaller signature footprint, while others might emphasize a compact PK size.
     - Signing Time vs. Verification Time: For certain dapps, the signing speed might be more crucial, while for others, rapid signature verification could be the priority.
4. **Security analysis**
   - It is essential to consider the underlying assumptions and potential vulnerabilities of a signature scheme.
     - Example: ECDSA's security is proven under strong assumptions such as the Generic Group Model (GGM).
     - Malleability Concerns: Some signature schemes are susceptible to malleability, where a valid signature, `$\sigma$`, can be mauled into a different yet still valid signature, `$\sigma'$`, for the same message, `$m$`.
5. **Versatility**
   - The adaptability and flexibility of signature schemes are important to consider so you may properly accommodate the cryptographic needs of your dapp.
     - Example: The $t$-out-of-$n$ threshold BLS is very simple to implement.
```

Reviewer 3: I added a short description for each factor and reformatted the examples for improved readability.
